Add user documentation for the new test explorer (#3436)
Shopify/ruby-lsp: jekyll/test_explorer.markdown

---
layout: default
title: Test explorer
parent: VS Code extension
---

# Test explorer

{: .important }
The new test explorer implementation is currently being rolled out to users! You can adopt it early by toggling this
feature flag in your user or workspace settings<br>
"rubyLsp.featureFlags": { "fullTestDiscovery": true }

The Ruby LSP implements VS Code's [test explorer](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/debugtest/testing), which allows
users to execute the tests defined in their codebase in 4 modes directly from inside the editor:

- Run (default mode): runs the selected tests and displays results in the test results panel
- Run in terminal: runs the selected tests in a terminal set up by the Ruby LSP
- Debug: starts an interactive debugging session for the selected tests
- Coverage: runs tests in coverage mode and shows results inside the editor

![Test explorer demo](images/test_explorer.gif)

## Design

> Our design was based on 2 main problems that had to be addressed:
> 
> 1. Ruby has many different test frameworks and we wanted to be able to support all of them without requiring extra
> editor extensions
> 2. Whatever solution had to be performant enough to work on large scale applications

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our design is based on addressing 2 main goals:

1. Supporting Ruby's diverse test frameworks without the need for extra editor extensions
2. Ensuring the solution is performant enough for large scale applications
```

  # Minitest reporters cannot be used when running through the Ruby LSP integrations as it breaks our custom reporter

  require "minitest/reporters"
  Minitest::Reporters.use!(...)
end
```

Users can also differentiate between the mode of execution, which is the value of the `RUBY_LSP_TEST_RUNNER` variable:

```ruby
# test/test_helper.rb

case ENV["RUBY_LSP_TEST_RUNNER"]
when "run"
  # Do something when using run or run in terminal modes
when "debug"
  # Do something when using debug mode
when "coverage"
  # Do something when using coverage mode
else
  # Do something when running outside of the context of the Ruby LSP integration
end
```

## Other editors

The test explorer functionality is not yet standardized as part of the
[language server specification](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/specification), which means that
it cannot be used by other editors without custom extension code to integrate all of the pieces together.

The Ruby LSP tries to put as much as possible on the server side, so that the code required for integrating is mostly
related to the editor's UI elements and available APIs. Both test discovery and test command resolution are

> implemented as custom LSP requests.

Reviewer 2: Since it's documentation, I think the phrasing should be more direct and actionable. So maybe something like: "As most of the implementation is on server side, if any editor supports similar UI elements and editor-side APIs (either directly or through plugins), it can integrate this feature as well."
